dissertation/README.md, before:

dissertation
===

Thesis:
- Q0. Does migratory typing benefit from a combination of honest and lying types?
- A1. Honest and lying types can coexist in a way that yields significant
      performance benefits.
      (coexist to acheive significant performance benefits)

Title: TBA

Deadline: Barkpeelers 2020


Acknowledgments:
 split into a dedication & bibliography
 bibliography should acknowledge everyone who cannot be cited
 dedication should give heartfelt thanks
 .... unless we have something to say, no acks!
   maybe a program or formula: \forall person \in (dedication, bio, bib) . thankyou(person)

- - -

update 2020-02-21
---

Dear committee members,

This update brings:
- a new thesis statement,
- negative results on the model,
- and positive notes on the implementation.


## new thesis statement

Honest and lying types can coexist
 in a way that retains the formal properties of each
 and yields measurably significant performance benefits.


blg; It's a benefit over the pre-coexistence world --- honest or lying
     alone, with conventional compiler technology.

jvj; Perhaps you need to add one bit that explains how you are going to measure
     and what is “significant”.

; jan's advice is pretty good, better than appending the blg comment ... if
  we can say what kind of combination and what kind of benefit.


## model

We currently have a model that combines honest & lying types in a simple way
and keeps the formal properties of each. The simple combination enforces all
honest types with wrappers and all lying types with shape checks.

If we split a program into 3 worlds --- H = honest, L = lying, U = untyped ---
then the diagram below shows the checks that currently happen at every boundary.
"wrap" = fully check & wrap. "scan" = shape-check. "noop" = do nothing.

  Current status:

      +--[wrap]-->  H  <--[wrap]--+
      |                           |
      v                           v
         >-------[noop]-------->
      L                           U
         <-------[scan]--------<

The question was, can we get away with fewer wraps & scans if every boundary
comes with labels for the languages on either side?

If lying types = transient, then the answer is usually no. For special cases
we can avoid wrapping an L value that enters an H context, but in general we
need to decorate a value with its original type + language to know what's safe
at a boundary. (That might be a good future project.)

If lying types != transient, and we use a kind of wrappers instead, then we
can make the H <-> L boundary a noop.


  Potential, if L creates wrappers:

      +--[noop]-->  H  <--[wrap]--+
      |                           |
      v                           v
         >-------[noop]-------->
      L                           U
         <-------[scan/wrap]---<

But then we lose all the benefits of the transient approach. Also, implementing
these "lying wrappers" is going to take some time.

So we decided to stay with the simple model and get moving on the implementation
and evaluation.


## implementation

I've been making progress fixing bugs and getting benchmarks to run with a
Transient Typed Racket. Right now all of the benchmarks [1] can run, but I
need to do more testing to make sure they're running correctly. Also, a few
are running slower now than with my ICFP'18 prototype and I wonder why.

Here is a patch that shows the changes to base typed racket:

  TODO


## next

For next time, the plan is a high-confidence implementation with some numbers.

Optimizer too?


Ben


update 2019-12-18
---

Dear committee members,

Since my proposal presentation, I've drafted a new thesis statement, made
progress on the model, and found some library-using programs that run faster
with my Transient prototype.


## draft thesis statement

Honest and lying types can coexist in a way that retains the formal
properties of each and yields measurably significant performance benefits.


## model

I developed a model with:

- three surface languages (honest, lying, untyped)
- one evaluation language
- one surface-to-evaluation compiler that inserts runtime checks

The semantics of the evaluation language does not rely on type or language
information; it simply executes the checks inserted by the compiler.

I have mostly completed the proofs of type soundness (for all 3 surface langs)
and complete monitoring (for honest types).

This model reflects what we can easily implement in the current Racket
implementation --- we can insert runtime checks during compilation,
but we don't yet have a way to attach type & language info to the checks.


## transient, math library

I've found 7 untyped programs (from various Racket packages) that use the typed
math library. When I recompile the math library to use the transient prototype,
these programs get 2x to 30x faster.

I'll keep looking for more case studies like these, and hope to convert some
into full benchmarks.


## next

My next step is to add language information to the runtime checks in the model.
I expect to exploit this information to reduce the number of checks.

A little more precisely, the current model has 3 kinds of check:

1. wrap = check full type and wrap higher-order values
2. scan = check value shape
3. noop = do nothing

The next model will keep these kinds of checks and annotate each check in a
program with two languages. So if H = honest, L = lying, and U = untyped, we
have at least these 6 checks:

1. H -> wrap -> U
2. U -> wrap -> H
3. H -> wrap -> L
4. L -> wrap -> H
5. U -> scan -> L
6. L -> noop -> U


Ben



2019-11-25
---

Promises

- change the thesis question to be clearer; articulate the goals & ways it can fail

- find criteria to test whether my implementation of Transient is
  worth measuring (two options so far: compare the overhead to
  Reticulated, and compare the perf. relative to Natural on programs
  where the two should theoretically do the same checks)

- for the evaluation, show the "fixed" modules and how they are typed
  (untyped, N, or T)

- look for additional benchmarks with fixed modules that cannot be typed as-is

- be sure to support & evaluate object-oriented programs

- run a quick experiment on the Math library to see what kind of
  improvement we can expect; find an untyped program that suffers,
  convert the library to Transient, see if the untyped suffering is
  gone, and see what happens if the program is Natural-typed

- rename "honest" & "lying"


2019-11-26
---

(email from Fritz; I'd asked about a reference to a McAllester paper)

> Hi Ben:
> 
> I've been thinking about contracts on and off recently; they are reflected in
> the enclosed talk given at KAIST earlier this year.  It's based on discussions
> with Thomas Jensen (INRIA) over the years.  It'd be great to see it written up
> and published at some point.  (It's not, yet :-))
> 
> A good part, except the duality per se, is technically worked out in Blume &
> MacAllester (enclosed), as it turns out, which is based on semantic types;
> these in turn have made a come-back, in great part due to work by Derek Dreyer
> and collaborators.  The duality idea was mentioned to me by Peter Thiemann in
> the coffee room at a Dagstuhl seminar (that Shriram organized -- the other 3
> organizers, including myself, were, relatively speaking, extras).  Peter
> subsequently published a paper with a surprisingly syntactic approach to
> contracts, similar to the Felleisen/Findler approach that you're following
> (whether you know it or not :-)); he later mentioned that he found that the
> duality idea didn't work, which has left me puzzled -- duality seems to work
> perfectly as the natural semantic framework for contracts, with
> instrumentation/monitoring, blame and blame label algorithms, etc, explicable
> as (sound) algorithms for constructing a proof that one of the components
> doesn't have the property it claims to have.  
> 
> I'm also including Jakob Rehof's Master's thesis; it's the most advanced
> write-up of Dynamic Typing, which is a static type discipline with explicit
> coercions (for deep/induced -- 'natural' in your terminology -- or top-level --
> 'transient' in your terminology -- checking and tagging).  Prior publications
> are in LFP '92, ESOP '92, FPCA '95, Science of Computer Programming '94.  In
> terms of 'gradual typing', sections of code without coercions are
> statically/fully typed in Dynamic Typing; those with coercions are dynamically
> typed/run-time typed ('untyped'), though some tags and checks may be omitted
> when it's statically proved to be safe to do so.  Note that the 'positive'
> coercions in Dynamic typing represent tagging operations -- the data structures
> are only implemented with those tags if there is such a coercion inserted or
> inferred in the source code.  In particular, statically typed code has no tags,
> like C or like a modern (post-Lisp)  ML family compiler; see e.g. our FPCA '95
> article (also in MS thesis, Chap. 7).  If you're wondering about support for
> garbage collection, fair enough; we should talk about region-based memory
> management at some point then...
> 
> Best regards,
> Fritz

Followup:

> ICFP '15 is what they published after the Dagstuhl seminar where I talked to
> both of them (actually, Peter; Matthias is a very quiet person) -- but didn't
> contain what I thought it would.  For some reason they didn't choose a
> semantic types approach; a semantic types approach is tricky, but actually
> quite elegant (the difference between error and nontermination is the
> critical ingredient); see my slides (I have written up more, but nothing is
> published yet; many of the semantic ideas are present or implicit in
> McAllester's and Dreyer's work) .  Syntactic dependent type approaches can
> get entangled in various quandaries; a semantic duality approach (probably
> best developed in a semantic realizability setting rather than syntactic
> contracts/dependent types, etc.)  has proved quite robust so far.

Well okay, he too is interested in the semantic types perspective. That makes:
 Ron = type-semantics to get N,T,E operational semantics
 Amal = semantic version of complete monitoring

- - -

Commit message:

dissertation: edit update 2
review, shorten, further draft the update

still need to:
- propose a thesis statement
- create a diff

dissertation/README.md, after:

dissertation
===

Thesis:
- Q0. Does migratory typing benefit from a combination of honest and lying types?
- A1. Honest and lying types can coexist in a way that yields significant
      performance benefits.
      (coexist to acheive significant performance benefits)

Title: TBA

Deadline: Barkpeelers 2020


Acknowledgments:
 split into a dedication & bibliography
 bibliography should acknowledge everyone who cannot be cited
 dedication should give heartfelt thanks
 .... unless we have something to say, no acks!
   maybe a program or formula: \forall person \in (dedication, bio, bib) . thankyou(person)

- - -

update 2020-02-21
---

Dear committee members,

This update brings:
- a new thesis statement,
- negative results on the model,
- and positive notes on the implementation.


## new thesis statement

Honest and lying types can coexist
 in a way that retains the formal properties of each
 and yields measurably significant performance benefits.


blg; It's a benefit over the pre-coexistence world --- honest or lying
     alone, with conventional compiler technology.

jvj; Perhaps you need to add one bit that explains how you are going to measure
     and what is “significant”.

; jan's advice is pretty good, better than appending the blg comment ... if
  we can say what kind of combination and what kind of benefit.

; ... coexist ... symbiotic ... better together ...



## model

We currently have a model that combines honest & lying types in a simple way.
If we split a program into 3 worlds --- H = honest, L = lying, U = untyped ---
then the diagram below shows the checks that currently happen at every boundary.
A "wrap" is a wrapper or deep check, a "scan" is a shape check, and a "noop"
is no check.

      +--[wrap]-->  H  <--[wrap]--+
      |                           |
      v                           v
         >-------[noop]-------->
      L                           U
         <-------[scan]--------<

     Current status

The question from last update was whether we can get away with fewer wraps
and scans by adding labels to every boundary.

If lying types = transient, then the answer is usually no. For special cases
we can avoid wrapping an L value that enters an H context, but in general
boundary labels aren't enough. So the picture above doesn't change. We need to
decorate a value with its original type to know whats safe. That may be a good
future project, but I think adding metadata to the runtime is out of scope for
my dissertation.

If lying types != transient and we use a kind of wrappers instead, then we
can make the H <-> L boundary a noop.

      +--[noop]-->  H  <--[wrap]--+
      |                           |
      v                           v
         >-----[noop/wrap]----->
      L                           U
         <-----[scan/wrap]-----<

     Potential, if L creates wrappers

But now we lose the benefits of transient. Implementing "lying wrappers" is
also a big project, out of scope.

So we'we decided to stay with the simple model and get moving on the
implementation and evaluation.


## implementation

I've been making progress fixing bugs and getting benchmarks to run with a
Transient Typed Racket. Right now all of the benchmarks can run, but I need to
do more testing to make sure they're running correctly and efficiently.

Here is a patch that shows the changes to base Typed Racket:

  TODO


## next

For next time, the goal is to report some lessons and measurements about the
implementation.

Ben


update 2019-12-18
---

Dear committee members,

Since my proposal presentation, I've drafted a new thesis statement, made
progress on the model, and found some library-using programs that run faster
with my Transient prototype.


## draft thesis statement

Honest and lying types can coexist in a way that retains the formal
properties of each and yields measurably significant performance benefits.


## model

I developed a model with:

- three surface languages (honest, lying, untyped)
- one evaluation language
- one surface-to-evaluation compiler that inserts runtime checks

The semantics of the evaluation language does not rely on type or language
information; it simply executes the checks inserted by the compiler.

I have mostly completed the proofs of type soundness (for all 3 surface langs)
and complete monitoring (for honest types).

This model reflects what we can easily implement in the current Racket
implementation --- we can insert runtime checks during compilation,
but we don't yet have a way to attach type & language info to the checks.


## transient, math library

I've found 7 untyped programs (from various Racket packages) that use the typed
math library. When I recompile the math library to use the transient prototype,
these programs get 2x to 30x faster.

I'll keep looking for more case studies like these, and hope to convert some
into full benchmarks.


## next

My next step is to add language information to the runtime checks in the model.
I expect to exploit this information to reduce the number of checks.

A little more precisely, the current model has 3 kinds of check:

1. wrap = check full type and wrap higher-order values
2. scan = check value shape
3. noop = do nothing

The next model will keep these kinds of checks and annotate each check in a
program with two languages. So if H = honest, L = lying, and U = untyped, we
have at least these 6 checks:

1. H -> wrap -> U
2. U -> wrap -> H
3. H -> wrap -> L
4. L -> wrap -> H
5. U -> scan -> L
6. L -> noop -> U


Ben



2019-11-25
---

Promises

- change the thesis question to be clearer; articulate the goals & ways it can fail

- find criteria to test whether my implementation of Transient is
  worth measuring (two options so far: compare the overhead to
  Reticulated, and compare the perf. relative to Natural on programs
  where the two should theoretically do the same checks)

- for the evaluation, show the "fixed" modules and how they are typed
  (untyped, N, or T)

- look for additional benchmarks with fixed modules that cannot be typed as-is

- be sure to support & evaluate object-oriented programs

- run a quick experiment on the Math library to see what kind of
  improvement we can expect; find an untyped program that suffers,
  convert the library to Transient, see if the untyped suffering is
  gone, and see what happens if the program is Natural-typed

- rename "honest" & "lying"


2019-11-26
---

(email from Fritz; I'd asked about a reference to a McAllester paper)

> Hi Ben:
> 
> I've been thinking about contracts on and off recently; they are reflected in
> the enclosed talk given at KAIST earlier this year.  It's based on discussions
> with Thomas Jensen (INRIA) over the years.  It'd be great to see it written up
> and published at some point.  (It's not, yet :-))
> 
> A good part, except the duality per se, is technically worked out in Blume &
> MacAllester (enclosed), as it turns out, which is based on semantic types;
> these in turn have made a come-back, in great part due to work by Derek Dreyer
> and collaborators.  The duality idea was mentioned to me by Peter Thiemann in
> the coffee room at a Dagstuhl seminar (that Shriram organized -- the other 3
> organizers, including myself, were, relatively speaking, extras).  Peter
> subsequently published a paper with a surprisingly syntactic approach to
> contracts, similar to the Felleisen/Findler approach that you're following
> (whether you know it or not :-)); he later mentioned that he found that the
> duality idea didn't work, which has left me puzzled -- duality seems to work
> perfectly as the natural semantic framework for contracts, with
> instrumentation/monitoring, blame and blame label algorithms, etc, explicable
> as (sound) algorithms for constructing a proof that one of the components
> doesn't have the property it claims to have.  
> 
> I'm also including Jakob Rehof's Master's thesis; it's the most advanced
> write-up of Dynamic Typing, which is a static type discipline with explicit
> coercions (for deep/induced -- 'natural' in your terminology -- or top-level --
> 'transient' in your terminology -- checking and tagging).  Prior publications
> are in LFP '92, ESOP '92, FPCA '95, Science of Computer Programming '94.  In
> terms of 'gradual typing', sections of code without coercions are
> statically/fully typed in Dynamic Typing; those with coercions are dynamically
> typed/run-time typed ('untyped'), though some tags and checks may be omitted
> when it's statically proved to be safe to do so.  Note that the 'positive'
> coercions in Dynamic typing represent tagging operations -- the data structures
> are only implemented with those tags if there is such a coercion inserted or
> inferred in the source code.  In particular, statically typed code has no tags,
> like C or like a modern (post-Lisp)  ML family compiler; see e.g. our FPCA '95
> article (also in MS thesis, Chap. 7).  If you're wondering about support for
> garbage collection, fair enough; we should talk about region-based memory
> management at some point then...
> 
> Best regards,
> Fritz

Followup:

> ICFP '15 is what they published after the Dagstuhl seminar where I talked to
> both of them (actually, Peter; Matthias is a very quiet person) -- but didn't
> contain what I thought it would.  For some reason they didn't choose a
> semantic types approach; a semantic types approach is tricky, but actually
> quite elegant (the difference between error and nontermination is the
> critical ingredient); see my slides (I have written up more, but nothing is
> published yet; many of the semantic ideas are present or implicit in
> McAllester's and Dreyer's work) .  Syntactic dependent type approaches can
> get entangled in various quandaries; a semantic duality approach (probably
> best developed in a semantic realizability setting rather than syntactic
> contracts/dependent types, etc.)  has proved quite robust so far.

Well okay, he too is interested in the semantic types perspective. That makes:
 Ron = type-semantics to get N,T,E operational semantics
 Amal = semantic version of complete monitoring

- - -
